This is the lesson on a skill called Opposite Action.

Opposite action is a technique where you do the exact opposite of what you are feeling. Sounds weird, right? I know. 

To understand why this skill works so well, you need to understand that every emotion has an action urge. The whole point of having emotions is that they get you to do things. For example, fear gets you to run away, anger gets you to fight, shame gets you to hide, etc. Every emotion has an action. Emotions are useful - most of the time. For example, if you are in a dangerous place, fear mobilizes your body's resources to flee or problem solve to get out of the situation. When the action fits the situation (e.g., fits the facts) you want to act on the emotion. 

But what about when the emotion does not fit the situation? For example, when you feel fearful, but the situation is not one where you are in actual danger. Or when you feel angry, because you feel slighted by your friend, but you know they still really care about you. In these cases, it can make sense to not use the emotion urge because acting on it might be ineffective (e.g., losing a friend because you have an outburst, avoiding an important obligation because you are afraid). Every emotion also has an opposite action, which can at times be way more effective. 

When you feel sad and depressed, you want to stay in your room and don't want to get out. This is isolation. To change your sadness, you have to do the opposite which is to activate. Get yourself doing things. This is the opposite to staying in bed all days. 

Sometimes you do opposite action, even when the emotion fits the facts. Here's another example. Imagine you are up on a mountain and you get stuck - in front of you is a big drop and behind you are some animals that have traced your scent. You feel fear because of the drop and want to head back down the way you came, but the animals will surely attack and kill you. Faced with these options, you decide to jump because it's a more effective solution - you might get hurt, but you probably won't die. It's also the opposite action to fear (avoid). 

Every emotion has an action urge, which means every emotion has an opposite action. Let's look at those right now. 

Select an emotion: 
fear or anxiety, shame, sadness, guilt, envy, jealousy, anger. 

fear or anxiety: to avoid, run away, flee.
shame: to hide, avoid.
sadness: to withdraw, isolate
guilt: to apologize, repair, atone.
envy: to take what we want.
jealousy: to hold on to what we have, cling.
anger: to fight or attack

Now that we have seen action urges, let's explore the opposite action urges for emotions. 

fear or anxiety: to approach. 
shame: to be visible, vulnerable. 
sadness: to activate yourself.
guilt: don't apologize, redo the behavior without apologizing.
envy: to avoid or withdraw the stimulus eliciting envy. 
jealousy: to avoid and withdraw the stimulus eliciting jealousy
anger: to gently withdraw, imagine seeing from the other person's point of view.


