Problem Solving 
===============

The biggest trick with problem solving is figuring out what in the world is the actual problem to be solved.

When do you use this strategy? Well, remember when you looked at whether the emotion fits the facts, sometimes the emotion does fit the situation. In this case you can try problem solving to reduce or change how you are feeling. 

So let's say you are unhappy, misterable, or depression about something that's happening in the real world. You can try to solve the problem by changing the situation. You can use problem solving when the situation is the problem. 

There are a number of steps here: 
1. Figure out what is the problem situation. Sometimes this is the hardest part. You know you're really upset but you don't know exactly why. This takes some checking the facts to look at the situation that is causing the emotion. 

2. Double check the facts. You want to check the facts again to make sure you are not interpreting the situation incorrectly. 

3. Identify your goals. What needs to change? What is your desired outcome in this situation. 

4. Brainstorming and thinking up solutions. Write down every solution that comes to mind without censoring. 

Let's say the problem is that you have a job and you hate it. In fact, you wake up in the morning and dread going into work. Maybe your bored or upset or distressed because of the fact that you hate your job. First you need to check the facts and see if you really do hate the entire job (and not just some smaller aspect of it such as not liking your boss).

Here the goal is to like your job. To brainstorm: just quit, call in sick everyday, talk to manager to see if I can get my job changed, burn down the building, radical acceptance, look for new jobs, apply for new classes to learn new skills. You censor after you have brainstormed as many as possible. 

5. Choose which option is most likely to work. You might say "quitting" is the easiest but perhaps you don't have the money to afford not working at the moment. You could call in sick daily, but it won't really solve the actual problem and you will use up all your benefit days as well. Radical acceptance may help in the moment. Talking to my manager is a good idea too. Perhaps talking to my manager is a good option because I can express how I am feeling to my manager to perhaps start exploring a solution. 

6. Try out the solutions that you have chosen. Put your ideas into action. 

7. Evaluate the results of the solution that you have chosen. 

Remember to actually change the way you are feeling, you're going to have to do something. So don't expect to feel better if you don't put any of your solutions into action. 

