STOP exercise. 
==============

This exercise helps you to not make a current emotional situation any worse. 

S = Stop the urge to act immediately. 
T = take a step back and detach from the situation. 
O = observe, so you can gather information on what is happening. 
P = proceed mindfully, by evaluating the most effective option to take, given the goals, and finally following that option. 

Repeat after me: 
(show one step on it's own page with a timer counting down for 40 seconds)

1. Stop: When you feel that your emotions are about to take control, STOP. Don't react, don't move a muscle, just freeze. It can help prevent you from doing what your emotion wants you to do (the emotion urge) - to act without thinking. Stay in control. Remember: you are the boss of your emotions. Or at least you can become the boss. 

2. Take: When you are faced with a difficult situation, it may be hard to think about how to deal with it on the spot. Give yourself time to calm down and think. Take a step back - in your mind or physically - from the situation. Get unstuck. Take a deep breath. Continue breathing deeply until you are back in control. Do not let your emotion control what you do. Remember: you are not your emotion. Do not let it put you over the edge. 

3. Observe: Observe what is happening around you and within you. Who is involved? What are other people doing and saying? To make effective choices, it is important to not jump to conclusions. Gather the relevant facts to understand what is going on and what your options are. Try to be non-judgmental. 

4. Proceed mindfully: Ask yourself: "What do I want from this situation? What are my goals? What choice might make the situation better or worse?" Use your wise mind to walk the path between emotional and rational mind and ask how it would deal with this problem. When you are calm and in control, and have some information about what is going on, you are better prepared to deal with the situation effectively, rather than make it worse. 